"How to write a new rule?" Guide (#267)
18F/fedramp-automation: src/validations/rules/Writing_FedRAMP_Validations.md

# How to create FedRAMP OSCAL validation constraints

> FedRAMP OSCAL documents are structured XML documents. The document syntax is defined by OSCAL XML Schema. However, XML Schema cannot express many semantic constraints, and an additional schema language is employed: Schematron.

Reviewer: It may be overkill but I would define Schematron via "Schematron is used for business rules validation, data reporting, general validation, quality control, quality assurance, firewalling, filtering, contraint checking, naming and design rules checking...."   - from the Schematron website.

Author: An abbreviated description of (FedRAMP-specific) use will be added.

# Technologies used

- [XML](https://www.w3.org/standards/xml/) is a structured document langauge.
- [Namespaces in XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names/) allow element (and attribute) names to be declared in distinct namespaces

> - [OSCAL](https://pages.nist.gov/OSCAL/) is used to define the several FedRAMP document types in a structured data form. NIST provides XML Schema documents for the various OSCAL document types.

Reviewer: document types (e.g. SSP, SAP, SAR, POAMs)

Author: Cited elsewhere.

- [Schematron](https://schematron.com/) is used to declare assertions for documents to be validated
- [XPath](https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-31/) is used in Schematron to define rule contexts and assertion tests
- [XSpec](https://github.com/xspec/xspec) is used to create unit tests for Schematron assertions
- [XSLT](https://www.w3.org/TR/xslt-30/) is used to manipulate XML documents, and is used to transpile Schematron documents into XSLT documents

Use of Schematron will require familiarity with XPath for context identification and assertion tests, and XSpec for creation of unit tests.

## Useful resources

> [xpather.com](http://xpather.com/) is a browser-based XPath exploration tool. It is not a strict XPath tool: namespaces in the XML document are ignored, and the XPath queries must not use include namespace prefixes. This design makes rapid prototyping easier, but readily copy-pasting XPath into Schematron not error-free.

Reviewer: Not sure what your trying to say here regarding the "readilly copy-pasting ..." sentence.   Maybe change this to " prototyping easier but additional care must be taken when copy-pasting into schmatron'.

[XSLT Fiddle](https://xsltfiddle.liberty-development.net/) is a browser-based XSLT exploration tool.

# FedRAMP OSCAL References

NIST has designed OSCAL to be flexible to the needs of different authorization and assessment frameworks, whether or not they originate from NIST's very own [Risk Management Framework](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/about-rmf) or not. OSCAL has a set a syntax. For required or recommended data that must be structured and organized in a specific way within this syntax, OSCAL developers use constraints. In OSCAL, constraints and the constraints model define, given syntactically correct documents, what data is required or recommended.

> FedRAMP has adopted and extended NIST OSCAL document types. These adaptations are documented in the GSA [fedramp_automation repository](https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/tree/master/documents).

Reviewer: Why did FedRAMP extend the NIST OSCAL document types?   Maybe "FedRAMP has adopted and extended NIST OSCAL document types in order to support FedRAMP specific requirements".

Author: Intent added.

> The pertinent normative documents are
> 
> - [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Content](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Content.pdf)
> 
> - [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP System Security Plans (SSP)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_System_Security_Plans_(SSP).pdf)
> 
> - [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Plans  (SAP)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Plans_(SAP).pdf)
> 
> - [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Reports (SAR)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Reports_(SAR).pdf)
> 
> - [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Plan_of_Action_and_Milestones_(POAM).pdf)

Reviewer 2: B: I did discuss with @volpet2014 and this is a valid concern.
```suggestion
The pertinent normative documents are

- [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Content](../../../documents/Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Content.pdf)

- [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP System Security Plans (SSP)](../../../documents/Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_System_Security_Plans_(SSP).pdf)

- [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Plans  (SAP)](../../../documents/Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Plans_(SAP).pdf)

- [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Reports (SAR)](../../../documents/Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Reports_(SAR).pdf)

- [Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M)](../../../documents/Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Plan_of_Action_and_Milestones_(POAM).pdf)
```

```
<sch:schema
    queryBinding="xslt2"
    xmlns:array="http://www.w3.org/2005/xpath-functions/array"
    xmlns:doc="https://fedramp.gov/oscal/fedramp-automation-documentation"
    xmlns:map="http://www.w3.org/2005/xpath-functions/map"
    xmlns:o="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/1.0"
    xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"
    xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">

    <sch:ns
        prefix="f"
        uri="https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="o"
        uri="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/1.0" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="oscal"
        uri="http://csrc.nist.gov/ns/oscal/1.0" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="fedramp"
        uri="https://fedramp.gov/ns/oscal" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="lv"
        uri="local-validations" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="array"
        uri="http://www.w3.org/2005/xpath-functions/array" />
    <sch:ns
        prefix="map"
        uri="http://www.w3.org/2005/xpath-functions/map" />
``` 
Namespace declarations made on the root element are for that document.

Namespace declarations via the `<sch:ns>` element are for instance documents to be validated.

> ## Example 1 - Existential and value checks

Reviewer: "Existential" seems cumbersome for this concept.   How about "Logic and value checks"  .. Just MHO.

Author: Altered a bit to explain the specific test for existence.

    <sch:assert
        diagnostics="responsible-party-has-definition-diagnostic"
        id="responsible-party-has-definition"
        role="error"
        test="
        every $p in oscal:party-uuid
        satisfies exists(//oscal:party[@uuid eq $p])">Every responsible party must be defined.</sch:assert>
    <sch:assert
        diagnostics="responsible-party-is-person-diagnostic"
        doc:guide-reference="Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP System Security Plans §4.6-§4.11"
        id="responsible-party-is-person"
        role="error"
        test="
        if (
        current()/@role-id = (
        'system-owner',
        'authorizing-official',
        'system-poc-management',
        'system-poc-technical',
        'system-poc-other',
        'information-system-security-officer',
        'authorizing-official-poc'
        )
        )
        then
        every $p in oscal:party-uuid
        satisfies
        exists(//oscal:party[@uuid eq $p and @type eq 'person'])
        else
        true()
        ">For some roles responsible parties must be persons.</sch:assert>
</sch:rule>
```
The `<rule>` sets the context for the subordinate assertions.

> The first (`id="responsible-party-has-role"`) assertion is an existential test for a `<role>` for the `@role-id`. The use of the `//` prefix in the path `//oscal:role[@id eq current()/@role-id]` means "any `<role>` element within the document" matching the context `@role-id`.

Reviewer: Same comment as above "existential" vs. "logic"

Author: Altered a bit to explain the specific test for existence.

The second (`id="responsible-party-has-party-uuid"`) assertion is just an existential test for `<party-uuid>`.

The third (`id="responsible-party-has-definition"`) assertion is an existential test that every `<party-uuid>` reference (there may be more than one subordinate to `<responsible-party>`) references a `<party>` anywhere within the ndocument. 

The fourth () assertion ensures that specific role types identify a responsible **person** (i.e., a `<party>` defined as a person).

## Example 3 - remote resource reference

> This example uses remote HTTPS resource availability to ensure a CMVP citation is actually found on the related NIST web site.

Reviewer: Spell out CMVP (Cryptographic Module Validation Program).. When I first read the sentence I had no idea what you were talking about.

Author: Acronym spelled out.

# How to create FedRAMP OSCAL validation constraints

FedRAMP OSCAL documents are structured XML documents. The document syntax is defined by OSCAL XML Schema. However, XML Schema cannot express many semantic constraints, and an additional schema language is employed: Schematron.

# Technologies used

> - [XML](https://www.w3.org/standards/xml/) is a structered document langauge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [XML](https://www.w3.org/standards/xml/) is a structured document language.
```

Author: I'll fix this and others. I actually ran a spell checker against this. Apparently not the best of spell checkers.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762

> - [Namespaces in XML](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names/) are freqently encountered in structured XML documents

Reviewer 2: Consider me a novice developer, why do I care?

Author: Namespaces routinely confuse novice developers and are a major cause of mistakes.

It's a bit late to excise XML namespace prefixes from what we've put together. I suppose I could just not mention them.

Author: Altered in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762

- [XSLT](https://www.w3.org/TR/xslt-30/) is used to manipulate XML documents, and is used to transpile Schematron documents into XSLT documents

# FedRAMP OSCAL References

FedRAMP has adopted and extended NIST OSCAL document types. These adaptations are documented in the GSA [fedramp_automation repository](https://github.com/GSA/fedramp-automation/tree/master/documents).

The pertinent normative documents are

-[Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Content](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Content.pdf)

-[Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP System Security Plans (SSP)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_System_Security_Plans_(SSP).pdf)

-[Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Plans  (SAP)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Plans_(SAP).pdf)

-[Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Security Assessment Reports (SAR)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Reports_(SAR).pdf)

-[Guide to OSCAL-based FedRAMP Plan of Action and Milestones (POA&M)](./Guide_to_OSCAL-based_FedRAMP_Plan_of_Action_and_Milestones_(POAM).pdf)

Each describes how FedRAMP expects each OSCAL document type is to be presented in an authorization package.

# FedRAMP validation constraints

> FedRAMP validation constraints extend the NIST OSCAL XML Schema constraints. The XML Schema constraints are essentially syntactic; Schematron is used to augment the former with semantic constraints which cannot be expressed using XML Schema.

Reviewer 2: Can we explain what they are?

> NIST has designed OSCAL to be flexible to the needs of different authorization and assessment frameworks, whether or not they originate from NIST's very own [Risk Management Framework](https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/about-rmf) or not. OSCAL has a set a syntax. For required or recommended data that must be structured and organized in a specific way within this syntax, OSCAL developers use constraints. In OSCAL, constraints and the constraints model define, given syntactically correct documents, what data is required or recommended.

Author: Adopted in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762

> Schematron constraints have thus far been for system security plan documents. They are found in a Schematron document `ssp.sch`.

Reviewer 3: Making `ssp.sch` and the other documents into relative links in the repo would be nice.

Reviewer 3: Also, I think this should reference the corresponding XSpec.

Author: I'll make both changes.

> A companion document `fedramp_values.xml` defines sets of allowed values for various FedRAMP OSCAL XML  elements and their attributes.

Reviewer 2: Why do we do that?

> Constraints define required or recommended data elements FedRAMP expects in syntactically valid OSCAL documents. When developing rules, developers will recognize in most cases there are two pieces to a rule checking the constraint: the analytical query of the OSCAL data, and cross-referencing that data with a set of known values for given data elements in a constraint. Much like other software projects, FedRAMP has opted to store the known values as external configuration that can be adapted with changing the analytical query operation of the rule. These are the FedRAMP values.

Author: Adopted in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762

> An additional Schmeatron document `sch.sch` defines constraints for the FedRAMP Schematron constraints themselves, guiding a FedRAMP constraint author to augment the fundamental Schematron with FedRAMP-specific constructs. These augmentations provide

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An additional Schematron document `sch.sch` defines a style guide for FedRAMP Schematron to ensure developers continue to follow best practices.
```

Reviewer 2: I am a novice developer, how do I use this?

Author: Added text in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762

- References to associated unit tests
- References to documentation related to the constraint
- References to associated diagnostic messages
- Forward and reverse linkages between Schematron rules (`<rule>` elements), assertions (`<assert>` elements, and `<diagnostic>` elements.

# Examples of Schematron constraints

## Example 1

> Consider this [code block](https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/blob/develop/src/validations/rules/ssp.sch#L2176-L2213).

Reviewer 3: It may be preferable to include the code block in the markdown, rather than link to it - because the line numbers will quickly get out of date as `ssp.sch` is updated.

Author: Agreed.

The `<sch:rule>` element sets the locus within the document to be used as a relative reference for the subordinate assertions (`<sch:assert>` elements). In this case, the locus is `oscal:system-characteristics`: an XPath statement identifying the context element using a (namespace-)qualified element name.

The first assertion `id="has-system-id"`has a test (an XPath statement in the `test` attribute stating `oscal:system-id[@identifier-type eq 'https://fedramp.gov']` which asserts "the `oscal:system-characteristics` element has a child element `oscal:system-id` which must have an `@identifier-type eq 'https://fedramp.gov'` with a specific value. The natural language prose equivalent "A FedRAMP SSP must have a FedRAMP system identifier." resides within the `<sch:assert>` element.

The next two assertions are similar, each stating a particular child element must be present.

> A reference to the `fedramp_values.xml` document sets a variable to the desired [`<value-set>`](https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/blob/develop/dist/content/resources/xml/fedramp_values.xml#L83-L92) allowed values. The following assertion (`id="has-fedramp-authorization-type"`) tests that a child `<oscal:prop>` element has the desired attributes.

Reviewer 2: This is a good start, but I am not sure it explains to me how to modify, add, or remove a rule in a way sufficiently explanatory to someone who does not have sufficiently deep experience in XML technologies, XDM (XML Document Model), Schematron, or its underlying technologies.

I think we should meet tomorrow and discuss further.

Author: Added several examples in https://github.com/18F/fedramp-automation/commit/bd71afaefcda11214aac1b0a6fd84d7f3e9a7762
